README.md, before:

# Weather Dashboard

ESPHome configuration for the reTerminal E1002 displaying a weather dashboard with indoor conditions, current outdoor conditions, and a 3-day forecast.

## Display Layout

```
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  HEADER BAR  (y 0–58)  Navy bg / White text  │  Date + battery          │
├────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  INDOOR  (x 0–380)         │  OUTDOOR  (x 400–800)                       │
│  Large °F   Humidity %     │  Large °F   Humidity %   Condition          │
│  (y 70–285)                │  (y 70–285)                                 │
├────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  3-DAY FORECAST (y 295–480) — three equal panels of ~266 px each        │
│  Panel 0 (Today)  │  Panel 1 (Tomorrow)  │  Panel 2 (Day after)         │
└───────────────────┴──────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────┘
```

## Color Legend

| Color | Usage |
|-------|-------|
| Navy | Header background, day name labels |
| White | Header text |
| Blue | "INDOOR" label, low temperatures |
| Green | "OUTDOOR" label |
| Yellow | Sunny / partly cloudy conditions |
| Red | High temperatures, storm conditions |
| Black | Body text, rules |

## Prerequisites

### Home Assistant Integrations

- [OpenWeatherMap](https://www.home-assistant.io/integrations/openweathermap/) — provides `weather.openweathermap`
- Set your unit system to **Imperial** in HA (Settings → System → General) so temperatures arrive in °F

### Template Sensors (add to `configuration.yaml`)

The 3-day forecast requires individual template sensors because ESPHome can only read simple entity states, not forecast list attributes directly.

Add the following to your Home Assistant `configuration.yaml`:

```yaml
template:
  - sensor:
      - name: "Forecast Day0 Name"
        unique_id: forecast_day0_name
        state: >
          {{ as_timestamp(now()) | timestamp_custom('%A') }}

      - name: "Forecast Day1 Name"
        unique_id: forecast_day1_name
        state: >
          {{ (as_timestamp(now()) + 86400) | timestamp_custom('%A') }}

      - name: "Forecast Day2 Name"
        unique_id: forecast_day2_name
        state: >
          {{ (as_timestamp(now()) + 172800) | timestamp_custom('%A') }}

      - name: "Forecast Day0 Condition"
        unique_id: forecast_day0_condition
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[0]['condition'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day1 Condition"
        unique_id: forecast_day1_condition
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[1]['condition'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day2 Condition"
        unique_id: forecast_day2_condition
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[2]['condition'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day0 High"
        unique_id: forecast_day0_high
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[0]['temperature'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day0 Low"
        unique_id: forecast_day0_low
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[0]['templow'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day1 High"
        unique_id: forecast_day1_high
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[1]['temperature'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day1 Low"
        unique_id: forecast_day1_low
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[1]['templow'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day2 High"
        unique_id: forecast_day2_high
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[2]['temperature'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day2 Low"
        unique_id: forecast_day2_low
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[2]['templow'] }}
```

After adding these, restart Home Assistant and verify the sensors appear in Developer Tools → States.

## Secrets Required

The following keys must be present in your `secrets.yaml`:

```yaml
wifi_ssid: "your_network"
wifi_password: "your_password"
ap_password: "your_fallback_ap_password"
api_key: "your_base64_api_key="
ota_password: "your_ota_password"
```

## Flashing

```bash
esphome run weather-dashboard/weather-dashboard.yaml
```

## Notes

- The display refreshes every **hour** (driven by the SHT40 `on_value` callback at `update_interval: 3600s`). Color ePaper takes ~30 seconds to complete a full refresh.
- `update_interval: never` on the display component is intentional — the SHT40 sensor triggers the update.
- Requires **ESPHome ≥ 2025.11.0** for the `Seeed-reTerminal-E1002` display model.
- The Arduino framework is mandatory for 8 MB PSRAM support.

Commit message:

Add green button (GPIO3) manual refresh trigger

README.md, after:

# Weather Dashboard

ESPHome configuration for the reTerminal E1002 displaying a weather dashboard with indoor conditions, current outdoor conditions, and a 3-day forecast.

## Display Layout

```
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  HEADER BAR  (y 0–58)  Navy bg / White text  │  Date + battery          │
├────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  INDOOR  (x 0–380)         │  OUTDOOR  (x 400–800)                       │
│  Large °F   Humidity %     │  Large °F   Humidity %   Condition          │
│  (y 70–285)                │  (y 70–285)                                 │
├────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  3-DAY FORECAST (y 295–480) — three equal panels of ~266 px each        │
│  Panel 0 (Today)  │  Panel 1 (Tomorrow)  │  Panel 2 (Day after)         │
└───────────────────┴──────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────┘
```

## Color Legend

| Color | Usage |
|-------|-------|
| Navy | Header background, day name labels |
| White | Header text |
| Blue | "INDOOR" label, low temperatures |
| Green | "OUTDOOR" label |
| Yellow | Sunny / partly cloudy conditions |
| Red | High temperatures, storm conditions |
| Black | Body text, rules |

## Prerequisites

### Home Assistant Integrations

- [OpenWeatherMap](https://www.home-assistant.io/integrations/openweathermap/) — provides `weather.openweathermap`
- Set your unit system to **Imperial** in HA (Settings → System → General) so temperatures arrive in °F

### Template Sensors (add to `configuration.yaml`)

The 3-day forecast requires individual template sensors because ESPHome can only read simple entity states, not forecast list attributes directly.

Add the following to your Home Assistant `configuration.yaml`:

```yaml
template:
  - sensor:
      - name: "Forecast Day0 Name"
        unique_id: forecast_day0_name
        state: >
          {{ as_timestamp(now()) | timestamp_custom('%A') }}

      - name: "Forecast Day1 Name"
        unique_id: forecast_day1_name
        state: >
          {{ (as_timestamp(now()) + 86400) | timestamp_custom('%A') }}

      - name: "Forecast Day2 Name"
        unique_id: forecast_day2_name
        state: >
          {{ (as_timestamp(now()) + 172800) | timestamp_custom('%A') }}

      - name: "Forecast Day0 Condition"
        unique_id: forecast_day0_condition
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[0]['condition'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day1 Condition"
        unique_id: forecast_day1_condition
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[1]['condition'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day2 Condition"
        unique_id: forecast_day2_condition
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[2]['condition'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day0 High"
        unique_id: forecast_day0_high
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[0]['temperature'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day0 Low"
        unique_id: forecast_day0_low
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[0]['templow'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day1 High"
        unique_id: forecast_day1_high
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[1]['temperature'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day1 Low"
        unique_id: forecast_day1_low
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[1]['templow'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day2 High"
        unique_id: forecast_day2_high
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[2]['temperature'] }}

      - name: "Forecast Day2 Low"
        unique_id: forecast_day2_low
        unit_of_measurement: "°F"
        state: >
          {{ state_attr('weather.openweathermap', 'forecast')[2]['templow'] }}
```

After adding these, restart Home Assistant and verify the sensors appear in Developer Tools → States.

## Secrets Required

The following keys must be present in your `secrets.yaml`:

```yaml
wifi_ssid: "your_network"
wifi_password: "your_password"
ap_password: "your_fallback_ap_password"
api_key: "your_base64_api_key="
ota_password: "your_ota_password"
```

## Flashing

```bash
esphome run weather-dashboard/weather-dashboard.yaml
```

## Manual Refresh

The green button on top of the device (GPIO3) triggers an immediate display refresh when pressed. This is useful for forcing an update outside of the hourly cycle without waiting for the next SHT40 reading.

## Notes

- The display refreshes every **hour** (driven by the SHT40 `on_value` callback at `update_interval: 3600s`). Color ePaper takes ~30 seconds to complete a full refresh.
- `update_interval: never` on the display component is intentional — the SHT40 sensor triggers the update.
- Requires **ESPHome ≥ 2025.11.0** for the `Seeed-reTerminal-E1002` display model.
- The Arduino framework is mandatory for 8 MB PSRAM support.
